4216: Image pull per runtime class KEP (#4217)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4216-image-pull-per-runtime-class/README.md

Extending image pulls to specify an optional runtime class would greatly help to extend windows platform matcher behavior depending on whether hyperV or process isolation is being used.
Additionally, having support to pull images per runtime class might also help projects like supporting different snapshotters with different runtimes as well.

### Goals

This KEP describes the detailed design and major API changes needed in kubelet, CRI and containerd to support image pull with optional runtime class option.
Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Note: This document does not intend to address snapshotter per runtime class. It is different from image pull per runtime class and would need a separate KEP to address

### Non-Goals

This KEP only addresses the changes needed on containerd runtime. It does not cover other runtimes like CRI-O and would need contributions from maintainers/contributors from other runtimes to support this on their runtimes.

## Proposal

## Design Details

### CRI/kubelet changes:

With this feature, multiple versions of the same image can exist on a single node.

> For exmaple, python image can exist on the node for WS2022 (20348 build number) and WS2019(17703 build number) depending on the guestOSVersion mentioned in containerd's toml file for a runtime.

Reviewer: example*

The following are scenarios where kubelet behavior needs to be extended to refer to image as its name and runtime class:

1. Before running a container, kuebelet checks to see whether the required image for the container already exists or not by calling the **EnsureImageExists()** function.

PullImageRequest has a field for ImageSpec which can hold info for the runtime class used to pull this image:

<pre>
message PullImageRequest {
    // Spec of the image.
    ImageSpec image = 1;
    // Authentication configuration for pulling the image.
    AuthConfig auth = 2;
    // Config of the PodSandbox, which is used to pull image in PodSandbox context.
    PodSandboxConfig sandbox_config = 3;
}
</pre>

2. Image status request/response can also make use of the newly added runtime class field in ImageSpec to specify the runtime class being used for the image. If none is specified, containerd will assume that the request is for the default runtime class defined for that platform in containerd.toml

<pre>
message ImageStatusRequest {
    // Spec of the image.
    ImageSpec image = 1;
    // Verbose indicates whether to return extra information about the image.

>     bool verbose = 2;

Reviewer: can you use diff syntax in this section so it's easier to see what's being added?

Author: There are no new changes being added in this message. I've highlighted ImageSpec field to indicate that this is where the new runtime class field is being added and will be populated. The last paragraph in the section write above this talks about how ImageSpec is being extended to add runtime handler field.

This problem can be fixed if containerd, CRI and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/ID, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/ID. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and pull the appropriate manifest from the image index. This document details the changes needed to support pulling images per runtime class.

> Adding this support would enable us to have different versions of the same image on a given node and could be really beneficial in virtualization based runtimes. In windows, differnt versions of a multiarch image could be pulled based on hyperV and process isolation. It will also be very helpful to support future projects to support snapshotter per runtimeclass. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding this support would enable us to have different versions of the same image on a given node and could be really beneficial in virtualization based runtimes. In windows, differnt versions of a multiarch image could be pulled based on hyperV and process isolation. It will also be very helpful to support future projects to support snapshotter per runtimeclass. 
```

It would be helpful to give a few reasons why this is helpful to add additional context.

Author: The motivation section has more details with examples.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Currently, the windows platform matcher looks for an exact OS version match between the host and guest while pulling images. This behavior is not accurate for hyperV isolation as the UVM/sandbox OS version could be different from the host OS version.  

For example, a user might want to pull an image like python (a manifest list) on a WS2022 host with an intent of running it in on a WS2019 hyperV isolated UVM. But unfortunately, the current windows platform matcher behavior only forces the WS2022 version of the python image to be pulled (due to the exact version match between host and guest). If a manifest list does not have a version that matches the host OS version, then the image pull fails.

> Extending image pulls to specify an optional runtime class would greatly help to extend windows platform matcher behavior depending on whether hyperV or process isolation is being used. Additionally, having support to pull images per runtime class might also help projects like supporting different snapshotters with different runtimes as well.

Reviewer 2: This section is mostly a duplicate of above, having it here is probably enough as the summary gives you the rational and this give more indepth details.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
This KEP describes the detailed design and major API changes needed in kubelet, CRI and containerd to support image pull with optional runtime class option.

> Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Author: snpashotter per runtimeclass is not in scope. It is one of the projects which folks have been talking about addressing for some time now. That needs some additional changes and should be addressed separately. But it will benefit from this work as image will already be addresses by (name, runtimeClass). I mentioned it in the summary/motivation section to only point out snapshotter per runtime class when it happens will benefit from these changes. Should I explicitly call it out as a out of scope/non-goals?

> Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Author: @aravindhp  to answer your question "Are changes to tooling like ctr and crictl in or out of scope?" 
No, they are in scope and I do intend to make the necessary changes for these. It is discussed in the later part of this KEP.

> Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Reviewer 2: > Should I explicitly call it out as a out of scope/non-goals?

yes please,  Has there been some discussion or preliminary work done to make sure these changes are compatible?

> Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Author: @jsturtevant I made changes to KEP to call it out.
Also, I don't think is any active effort that I know of for supporting snapshotter per runtime class. But we briefly discussed this is the kubelet garbage collection WG with @mikebrow  and @haircommander .

## Proposal

> 

Author: I do not see a comment box for your previous comment so I am addressing both here:

"Are changes to tooling like ctr and crictl in or out of scope?"

I intend to make necessary changes needed to crictl and ctr to support this feature. Have listed out the crictl changes that will be made in the later parts of the KEP. 

"I suggest expanding on your motivation section here and clearly calling out what the desired outcome is."

I think the summary and motivation sections are kinda duplicates so I have broken them into two parts with examples and the desired outcome in detail. Not sure if I have anything additional to add. Do you have something in mind that I need to add that I could be missing?

> 

Reviewer 3: The summary and motivation are not really duplicates. Think of summary as a sort of release note for the feature. The motivation section goes into why this feature is important for users and leads into goals and non-goals.

> 

Author: Okay. But I think summary needs to have a little of motivation anyway to completely be able to give a summary of what this KEP is trying to achieve.
Either ways, I am not sure what more detail is needed in either of these sections. I have put in all the details I could think about. If there is smth you see is missing please let me know

> 

Author: I added another example to motivation section as that was all I think could be added to these two sections.

This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### CRI/kubelet changes:

With this feature, multiple versions of the same image can exist on a single node. For exmaple, python image can exist on the node for WS2022 (20348 build number) and WS2019(17703 build number) depending on the guestOSVersion mentioned in containerd's toml file for a runtime. Therefore, it is important for kubelet, containerd and other components to identify this. The following sections details the major changes that would need to be made to the different components to support this.

#### ImageSpec

> Include field to specify optional runtime class to use to pull image

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Include field on CRI `ImageSpec` message to specify optional runtime class to use to pull image
```

**Proposed:**

<pre>
// ImageSpec is an internal representation of an image.
message ImageSpec {
    // Container's Image field (e.g. imageID or imageDigest).
    string image = 1;
    // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary metadata.
    // ImageSpec Annotations can be used to help the runtime target specific
    // images in multi-arch images.
    map<string, string> annotations = 2;
    // The container image reference specified by the user (e.g. image[:tag] or digest).
    // Only set if available within the RPC context.
    string user_specified_image = 18;
    // Named runtime configuration to use for pulling the image.
    // If the runtime handler is unknown, this request should be rejected.  An
    // empty string should select the default handler, equivalent to the
    // behavior before this feature was added.

>     <mark>string runtime_handler = 19;</mark>

Reviewer 2: Is this the only change required to also address the `snapshotter per runtimeclass` scenario?

Author: No, CRI has another store for storing snapshots related data. I haven't looked into it in detail but this is one of the main files that would need changes - https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/main/pkg/cri/store/snapshot/snapshot.go .

This KEP does not intend to cover snapshots per runtime class changes. It is a project I have heard folks are interested in several meetings so I just added it as one of the projects that would be benefitted from this image pull per runtime class. I will call it out in the KEP specifically to avoid any confusion.

Reviewer 4: Can we say that snapshots per runtime class changes are out of scope for this KEP and say something like implementation details will be handled by each container runtime?

}
</pre>

The "RuntimeClassName" of [podspec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3084) can be used to specify the runtime class name and then can be populated in ImageSpec struct during **EnsureImageExists()** call in kubelet.

ImageSpec is referenced in the following APIs and can set the RuntimeHandler
field if needed:

1. PullImageRequest
2. RemoveImageRequest
3. ImageStatusRequest

> ### Containerd changes:

Author: We do not intend to address any other runtimes. We could have someoene from other runtimes like CRI-O to add or support this. 

cc @mikebrow @haircommander  any thoughts here?

> ### Containerd changes:

Reviewer: > It almost feels like this KEP should be specific to the k8s components. 

yeah I agree here. I don't think the containerd specific changes are relevant here

> ### Containerd changes:

Author: @haircommander should the KEP just had the kubelet changes needed? Can I completely remove the containerd specifics then?  
@mikebrow @dcantah @dmcgowan what would be a good place to have the containerd changes? Should it just be a doc that I have linked to my PR?

	allCaps []string //nolint:nolintlint,unused // Ignore on non-Linux
	// unpackDuplicationSuppressor is used to make sure that there is only
	// one in-flight fetch request or unpack handler for a given descriptor's
	// or chain ID.
	unpackDuplicationSuppressor kmutex.KeyedLocker
	// nri is used to hook NRI into CRI request processing.
	nri *nri.API
	// containerEventsChan is used to capture container events and send them
	// to the caller of GetContainerEvents.
	containerEventsChan chan runtime.ContainerEventResponse
}
</pre>

This **platformMatcherMap** is initialized during **InitCriService()** function in containerd/pkg/cri/cri.go

Appropriate matcher is used to pull the desired version of an image based the platform matcher set for a particular runtime class.

For example, the flow would look as follows:

- specifying runtime handler name while pulling image. This will be populated in the PullImageRequest to criservice.PullImage() in containerd.
- retrieve this runtime handler string and pass appropriate handler from criservice.PullImage() using criservice.platformMatcherMap[runtimehandler]

### Update containerd.Store interface with options

> The fpllowing is done to be able to pass the runtimehandler information while publishing create/update/delete events (as they eventually call the criservice.UpdateImage API that need to know the runtime handler). RuntimeHandler information is not stored in any of core containerd data structures as this is intended to only be a concept at CRI layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is done to be able to pass the runtimehandler information while publishing create/update/delete events (as they eventually call the criservice.UpdateImage API that need to know the runtime handler). RuntimeHandler information is not stored in any of core containerd data structures as this is intended to only be a concept at CRI layer.
```

	if err != nil {
		return false
	}
	return true
}

type ImagesWrapper struct {
	Images Image
	RuntimeHandler string
}

func (c *Client) ListImagesWithPlatformMatcher(ctx context.Context, opts ...ListImageOpt) ([]ImagesWrapper, error) {
	var listImgOpts ListImageOptions
	for _, o := range opts {
		if err := o(ctx, &listImgOpts); err != nil {
			return nil, err
		}
	}

	imgs, err := c.ImageService().List(ctx, listImgOpts.Filters...)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	imagesW := make([]ImagesWrapper, len(imgs))
	if len(opts) == 0 { 
		for i, img := range imgs {
			imagesW[i].Images = NewImage(c, img)
			imagesW[i].RuntimeHandler = c.runtime
		}
	} else {
		for i, img := range imgs {
			for runtimeHandler, matcher := range listImgOpts.PlatformMatcherMap {
				tmp := NewImage(c, img)
				if checkIfValidPlatforMatcher(ctx, tmp.ContentStore(), tmp.Target(), matcher) {
					imagesW[i].Images = NewImageWithPlatform(c, img, matcher)
					imagesW[i].RuntimeHandler = runtimeHandler
				}
			}
			if imagesW[i].Images == nil {
				return nil, fmt.Errorf("valid platform matcher for image %v not found", img)
			}
		}
	}
	return imagesW, nil
}

</pre>

> ### Windows platform matcher optional changes

Reviewer 3: What is `Windows platform matcher`?

Author: Each platform has its own platform matchers defined in https://github.com/containerd/containerd/tree/main/platforms/default*.go files. Windows platform matcher is defined in https://github.com/containerd/containerd/tree/main/platforms/default_windows.go . I will add link to this in KEP for better clarity too.

Author: Added more details for this to the section

Windows platform matcher could optionally be extended to also check for host and UVM compatibility if hyperV isolation is being used based on the matrix described here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility?tabs=windows-server-2022%2Cwindows-10#windows-server-host-os-compatibility 

### Kubelet changes

Kubelet needs to change how it talks about images from just the image name to (imageName, runtimeclass). As discussed in earlier sections, extending the Image struct in CRI to add a field for runtimeclass will make it easier to extend Kubelet API to include this information. 

> The following are scenarios where kubelet behavior needs to be extended to refer to image as its name and runtime class:

Reviewer 2: Does kublet currently have access to the required information at every point when making the requests below?

Author: Yes. This is needed primarily:
1. EnsureImageExists() which is used to ensure an image exists before starting a pod or container. This has the needed info to identify the runtime class.
I see the same for RemoveImageRequest, ImageStatus and GC

1. Before running a container, kuebelet checks to see whether the required image for the container already exists or not by calling the **EnsureImageExists()** function.

> PullImageRequest has a field for ImageSpec which can hold info for the runtime class used to pull this image:

Author: If nothing is filled in, the ImagePullRequest will have an empty field for runtime class and containerd would check this and use default runtime handler for the platform if none was specified. It would need changes in pkg/kubelet/images/puller.go pullImage() function  and EnsureImageExists() function in pkg/kubelet/images/image_manager.go. They do have access to the ImageSpec and the runtime handlers need to be set by the called. In short, there are changes that will be needed.

<pre>
message PullImageRequest {
    // Spec of the image.
    ImageSpec image = 1;
    // Authentication configuration for pulling the image.
    AuthConfig auth = 2;
    // Config of the PodSandbox, which is used to pull image in PodSandbox context.
    PodSandboxConfig sandbox_config = 3;
}
</pre>

2. Image status request/response can also make use of the newly added runtime class field in ImageSpec to specify the runtime class being used for the image. If none is specified, containerd will assume that the request is for the default runtime class defined for that platform in containerd.toml

<pre>
message ImageStatusRequest {
    // Spec of the image.
    ImageSpec image = 1;
    // Verbose indicates whether to return extra information about the image.
    bool verbose = 2;
}

> message ImageStatusResponse {

Reviewer 2: Where is the runtimeclass being used in the Response?

Author: ImageStatusResponse.Image.RuntimeClass could have the runtime class that was used to pull the image. I thought this would be useful for cases where the ImageStatusRequest was made without specifying the runtime class, in which case containerd would have used the default runtimeclass for that platform. Filling this information in the ImageStatusResponse might help to add some info logging to kubelet.

Reviewer 2: got it, looks like `Image` has the `ImageSpec` already imbedded into it so it will get the updates.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6f5fa2eb2f4dc731243b00f7e781e95589b5621f/staging/src/k8s.io/cri-api/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L1412C24-L1412C24

Author: yeah

    // Status of the image.
    Image image = 1;
    // Info is extra information of the Image. The key could be arbitrary string, and
    // value should be in json format. The information could include anything useful
    // for debug, e.g. image config for oci image based container runtime.
    // It should only be returned non-empty when Verbose is true.
    map<string, string> info = 2;
}
</pre>

> 3. Image cleanup/kubelet garbage collection: Currently, kubelet GC will call into RemoveImage() on containerd side to remove unused images. kubelet will only pass the image name and containerd will currently delete all instances of the image. This needs to be extended on kubelet to ask for deleting (imageName, runtimeclass) to be more efficient. Optionally, we could add a behavior on containerd side to honor deletion of all versions of an image is that is was kubelet GC wants to do.

Author: > > This needs to be extended on kubelet to ask for deleting (imageName, runtimeclass) to be more efficient.
> 
> Is this possible?

I think this is GC behavior that would need to account for this once we change image to be referred by (imageName, runtimeclass) and I think this should be possible as runtimeclass field is added to the ImageSpec. If none is specified, containerd would try to delete the image with default runtime class.
cc @haircommander as he is working on altering kubelet GC behavior. I can work with you before changing this.

> 
> > Optionally, we could add a behavior on containerd side to honor deletion of all versions of an image is that is was kubelet GC wants to do.
> 
> I don't follow this sentence. What happens if all the images are cleaned up but some are still being used?

If some image is still being used, then containerd should not be successful in deleting the images, right? I think my sentence should be reworded as follows: 
"Optionally, we could add a behavior on containerd side to honor deletion of all versions of an image so that kubelet GC has a way to delete all versions of an image if it has identified that the images are not being used by any container/pod."

Does this answer the questions? Or am I missing smth?

> 3. Image cleanup/kubelet garbage collection: Currently, kubelet GC will call into RemoveImage() on containerd side to remove unused images. kubelet will only pass the image name and containerd will currently delete all instances of the image. This needs to be extended on kubelet to ask for deleting (imageName, runtimeclass) to be more efficient. Optionally, we could add a behavior on containerd side to honor deletion of all versions of an image is that is was kubelet GC wants to do.

Reviewer 2: I am not super familiar with this area, but It seems like there could be some tricky edge cases here, if kubelet thinks it deleted an image but containerd doesn't and vice versa but I don't really know enough

> 3. Image cleanup/kubelet garbage collection: Currently, kubelet GC will call into RemoveImage() on containerd side to remove unused images. kubelet will only pass the image name and containerd will currently delete all instances of the image. This needs to be extended on kubelet to ask for deleting (imageName, runtimeclass) to be more efficient. Optionally, we could add a behavior on containerd side to honor deletion of all versions of an image is that is was kubelet GC wants to do.

Author: I think that problem already exists with kubelet and containerd behavior for image deletion - didn't mean to indicate any exisitng behavior would change. Reworded this to reduce confusion.

1. crictl pull image --runtime runtimeClassName imageName

2. crictl images will have new column to specify the runtime class name of the image as we could now have multiple versions of the same image based on what runtime class was used to pull the image. If no runtime class was used it will specify the default runtime class name for the platform

3. crictl rmi should have new option to specify runtime class name so that the appropriate image can be removed. (With this feature in place, multiple versions of the same image can exist on the node based on what runtime class was used to pull the image)
4. crictl image info should show runtime class

### Test Plan

- Regression testing to ensure exisiting functionality is not regressed when no runtime class is specified while pulling the image
- Functional/integration tests for CRI, kubelet, containerd

[ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.

> For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

Reviewer 2: For Windows there are a few tests we can run, Are there any that would validate this on the Linux side?

Author: Yes we should have tests that test for functionality and regression across different platforms. Will call this out in the testing section.

` Note: ` UVM is short for utility VM. It is a light weight VM that boots a special version of Windows that is purpose built to do just one thing- run containers. UVMs provide strong isolation boundaries and do not share kernel with the host OS. They are transparent to the user and do not require any management from the user.

This problem can be fixed if container runtimes, CRI, and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/ID, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/ID. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and the pull implementation on container runtimes can be extended to pull the appropriate manifest from the image index.
An example implementation in the containerd container runtime on how the pull implementation can be extended to support this is as follows:

> On containerd, the windows platform matcher is responsible for pulling an appropriate manifest from an image index on windows platforms. Today, this platform matcher on windows always looks for a manifest with the OSVersion that matches the host and pulls it. This can be changed to pick a manifest with OSVersion that matches the one set for a particular runtime class in containerd.toml instead of the host OSVersion. 

Reviewer 5: Can we add an example of what a runtime class for this looks like?

    // Container's Image field (e.g. imageID or imageDigest).
    string image = 1;
    // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary metadata.
    // ImageSpec Annotations can be used to help the runtime target specific
    // images in multi-arch images.
    map<string, string> annotations = 2;
    // The container image reference specified by the user (e.g. image[:tag] or digest).
    // Only set if available within the RPC context.
    string user_specified_image = 18;
    // Named runtime configuration to use for pulling the image.
    // If the runtime handler is unknown, this request should be rejected.  An
    // empty string should select the default handler, equivalent to the
    // behavior before this feature was added.
    <mark>string runtime_handler = 19;</mark>
}
</pre>

The "RuntimeClassName" of [podspec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3084) can be used to specify the runtime class name and then can be populated in ImageSpec struct during **EnsureImageExists()** call in kubelet.

ImageSpec is referenced in the following APIs and can set the RuntimeHandler
field if needed:

1. PullImageRequest
2. RemoveImageRequest

> 3. ImageStatusRequest

Reviewer 5: ListImages

### Kubelet changes

Kubelet needs to change how it talks about images from just the image name to (imageName, runtimeclass). As discussed in earlier sections, extending the `Image` struct in CRI to add a field for runtimeclass will make it easier to extend Kubelet API to include this information.
` Note: ` The kubelet changes will be under a feature-gate called `RuntimeClassInCRICalls`
The following are scenarios where kubelet behavior needs to be extended to refer to image as its name and runtimeClass:

> 1. Before running a container, kuebelet checks to see whether the required image for the container already exists or not by calling the **EnsureImageExists()** function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Before running a container, kubelet checks to see whether the required image for the container already exists or not by calling the **EnsureImageExists()** function.
```

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: RuntimeClassInCRICalls
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet
- [x] Other
  - Describe the mechanism: `N/A`
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane? `No`
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node? `No`

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No. Aim of this KEP to ensure default behavior is not changed. Any changes to CRI and kubelet will be under feature gate as mentioned in earlier sections.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. All the code changes needed will be under feature gate `RuntimeClassInCriCalls` that will be off by default for alpha.

> Default exisiting behavior of kubelet will be ensured.

Reviewer 6: If I enable this, and then I end up pulling the same image name/tag but for different runtime classes to a node, then I disable this feature, will kubelet get confused about what image to use for a new container with that image name/tag?

Similarly, what happens to running containers? I guess they will be fine, even if they restart? But if the the pod is rescheduled to a node with flag off then of course it would get the host-matched image, but that seems fine.

Ideally, we should be able to disable this without any extra clean up needed. But if we do need some cleanup, we need to document it here.

Author: If the different image versions of the same image exist, turning off feature-gate without cleanup step will cause problems. This would require a cleanup step. Adding in these details as well.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> It should be a no-op

Reviewer 6: Similar questions to above - what if there are images for different runtime classes on kubelet and you re-enable this, what happens on container restart, pod restart, maybe kubelet / node restart? Are we in the clear for all of these?

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Yes, this test will be added for alpha.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

`Note:` This section will be filled once we move to beta.

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

> Image pulls for non-default runtime class goes through. Alternately, one could check the status of the feature gate.

Reviewer 6: So, the spirit of this question is "I am an operator with 10,000 clusters, and I have this feature enabled. But this feature is causing problems. Who will I break if I turn off this feature?". Thus, the idea is for a sort of global view of when it is in use. We get a little bit of it from the feature gate. But ideally what we have is a metric - say, for a given node how many times a different image was pulled than would have been otherwise (or even better if instrumentation is OK with the volume, would be to be able to identify the specific workloads).

Note this is a beta question, not required for alpha.

Author: An easy way to check this is how many images have a non-default runtime handler associated with it. This metric can be added for beta for sure. Updated the doc with the same.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Image pull goes through successfully when non-default runtimehandler is used.

> For example, if host is a windows node, user should be able to pull images for hyperV isolation even if the container image OSVersion does not match the host OS version.

Reviewer 6: Is there, say, a `kubectl` command that could tell you it worked, and pulled the right image?

Author: Hmm not that I am aware of. We could add metrics in beta that would help find out how many images are using a non-default runtime class when pulling images.

Reviewer 6: thanks that would be good

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

> Exisiting behavior of kubelet should not change when runtime class is not speified when image is pulled.

Reviewer 6: s/Exisiting/Existing/

there are a bunch of spelling errors / typos throughout the KEP. You may want to run it through a markdown spell checker. There are a few out there, I have used this one and it's kinda slow but works well enough: https://hub.docker.com/r/tmaier/markdown-spellcheck/

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

`N/A`

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?
`N/A`

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

> kubelet

Reviewer 6: No need for this. The spirit of this question is to identify dependencies - for example, an autoscaler likely requires a metrics service.

  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Today, container images in container runtimes are identified by the image name/id. Images can either be a manifest or manifest list/index. When an image is specified, platform matching logic in containerd is used to pull the appropriate manifest from the index of that image.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Today, container images in container runtimes are identified by the image name (aka. image reference) and/or image digest (usually a SHA256 cryptographic hash of the content). The content of the image referenced is either an image manifest or an image index manifest. The image index is typically arranged to contain a list of image manifests by platform (linux, windows,...).  When the reference is to an image index, platform matching logic is used to identify and pull the appropriately matching image manifest from the index for the platform that the container is being asked to run on.
```

         "platform": {
            "architecture": "ppc64le",
            "os": "linux"
         }
      },
      {
         "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
         "size": 2007,
         "digest": "sha256:f265d2f398ffce7252d6162ead0bc802afad2de309cf662ec16645d1e0e85564",
         "platform": {
            "architecture": "s390x",
            "os": "linux"
         }
      },
      {
         "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
         "size": 2831,
         "digest": "sha256:53c5f0dd905eef3899284d845431ccaa1045f97fc205edd87dfc2151c4331980",
         "platform": {
            "architecture": "amd64",
            "os": "windows",
           <mark> "os.version": "10.0.20348.1970"  </mark>
         }
      },
      {
         "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
         "size": 2831,
         "digest": "sha256:5981df14a07aaa7fe0c7d80a4c61f33f4ad4d8d29a346fd1b2cacf090b3de8c2",
         "platform": {
            "architecture": "amd64",
            "os": "windows",
           <mark> "os.version": "10.0.17763.4851" </mark>
         }
      }
   ]
}
</pre>

> For example, in containerd runtime , each platform has its own platform matcher which is used to

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In this image index example, each unique platform definition can be matched to the version of the image built for that specific platform, affording the container runtime the ability to
```

Reviewer 7: sure.. just suggesting here to add another sentence talking about the platform definition.. before introducing the platform matcher.. for that definition..

decide which manifest to pull from an image index/manifest list.

> Containerd's client structure has pointer to the default platform matcher based on what OS/platform the node is on (Linux, Windows, Darwin, etc).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For example, containerd's default platform matcher will automatically select the image manifest to use from an image index based on the digest to the image manifest for the OS/platform where the node is running (Linux, Windows, Darwin, etc).
```

The platform matcher on linux attempts to check for host and guest OS match and optionally for a variant match as well.

> However, the platform matcher on windows checks for exact OS version match between the host and guest (OSVersion field in the oci ImageSpec is primarily used only for windows manifests) and if a manifest with such an exact match is found, it is pulled. Otherwise an error is thrown. <br> This is the desired behavior for process isolated windows containers as its shares the kernel with the host OS. However, it is not ideal for hyperV isolated windows containers. This is because OS version of the host and the UVM image need not be the same.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
However, the platform matcher on windows checks for exact OS version match between the host and guest (OSVersion field in the oci ImageSpec is primarily used only for windows manifests) and if a manifest with such an exact match is found, it is pulled. Otherwise an error is thrown. <br> This is the desired behavior for process isolated windows containers running on the same kernel with the host OS. However, it is not ideal for hyperV isolated windows containers. This is because OS version of the host and the UVM image need not be the same.
```

Author: it does not on the same kernel as the OS. The windows base images have a kernel whose version is the same as the host OS kernel version.

Reviewer 7: isolated windows containers running on the same version of the kernel that the host is running

> For example, Windows Server 2019 container images can run inside a Utility VM (UVM) on a Windows Server 2022 host and because of this the image pulls should be allowed. For the full matrix of accepted behavior, check the link here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility?tabs=windows-server-2022%2Cwindows-10#windows-server-host-os-compatibility

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For example, Windows Server 2019 container images can run inside a Utility VM (UVM) on a Windows Server 2022 host and because the container will be running in the UVM, the platform matching image pulls for the UVM instances should be allowed. For the full matrix of accepted behavior, check the link here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility?tabs=windows-server-2022%2Cwindows-10#windows-server-host-os-compatibility
```

` Note: ` UVM is short for utility VM. It is a light weight VM that boots a special version of Windows that is purpose built to do just one thing- run containers. UVMs provide strong isolation boundaries and do not share kernel with the host OS. They are transparent to the user and do not require any management from the user.

> This problem can be fixed if container runtimes, CRI, and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/ID, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/ID. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and the pull implementation on container runtimes can be extended to pull the appropriate manifest from the image index.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This problem can be fixed if container runtimes, CRI, and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/imageDigest, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/imageDigest. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and the pull implementation on container runtimes can be extended to pull the appropriate manifest from the image index.
```

> An example implementation in the containerd container runtime on how the pull implementation can be extended to support this is as follows:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
An example implementation how the pull implementation in containerd can be extended to support this is as follows:
```

> On containerd, the windows platform matcher is responsible for pulling an appropriate manifest from an image index on windows platforms. Today, this platform matcher on windows always looks for a manifest with the OSVersion that matches the host and pulls it. This can be changed to pick a manifest with OSVersion that matches the one set for a particular runtime class in containerd.toml instead of the host OSVersion.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
On containerd, the windows platform matcher is responsible for pulling an appropriate image manifest from an image index on windows platforms. Today, this platform matcher on windows always looks for an image manifest with the OSVersion that matches the host and pulls it. This can be changed to pick the image manifest with the platform OSVersion that matches the one set for a particular runtime class in containerd.toml instead of the host OSVersion.
```

An example of how the guest platform information can be set in containerd is as follows:

<pre>
        [plugins."io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri".containerd.runtimes.runhcs-wcow-process]
          base_runtime_spec = ""
          cni_conf_dir = ""
          cni_max_conf_num = 0
          container_annotations = ["io.microsoft.container.*"]
          pod_annotations = []
          privileged_without_host_devices = false
          privileged_without_host_devices_all_devices_allowed = false
          runtime_path = ""
          runtime_type = "io.containerd.runhcs.v1"
          sandbox_mode = ""
          snapshotter = ""

<mark>
          [plugins."io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri".containerd.runtimes.runhcs-wcow-process.guest_platform]
            Architecture = "amd64"
            OS = "windows"
            OSFeatures = []
            OSVersion = "10.0.20348"
            Variant = ""
</mark>
          [plugins."io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri".containerd.runtimes.runhcs-wcow-process.options]
</pre>

On k8s, the pod and runtime class yamls would look as follows:

<pre>

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Author: Yes we would need a runtimeclass is OSVersion is different. Do you mean we should pass it in like this?
apiVersion: v1 
kind: Pod 
metadata: 
  name: mypod 
spec:
  containers: 
  - name: busybox 
    image: docker.io/library/busybox:1.35.0-musl 
    runtimeClassName: runhcs-wcow-runhcs

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer 2: @mrunalp could you explain a bit more what you mean? Setting the `runtimeClassName` on the pod spec is how this works today. 

There is some documentation on the various uses cases here https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-windows/1301-windows-runtime-class#story-2---forward-compatibility-with-hyper-v

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer 5: In the example above, OSVersion is `10.0.20348`. If there are multiple different OSVersions that need to be supported, mutliple RuntimeClasses will have to be created.

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Author: We want this to be more generic for all platforms. For windows, this would be OSVersion but linux does not use OSVersion and if they need to override default behavior, they could override the variant information. The guestPlatform field mentioned in the example for containerd is of type ocispec.Platform . Passing osversion alone will not be generic enough

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Author: container runtimes will use runtimeclasses to read the associated config from the toml and set up platform matchers (example in containerd) as needed.

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer 5: Thanks!

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer 7: Either way works for me... tuple or triplet  (image reference/digest, runtime class, platform (the oci platform struct)).  We can have more runtime classes one per unique desired platform (and name them accordingly), or pass the portions of the platform struct that the user desires to switch on, from the image spec portion(s) of the pod spec... Do all of the containers need to be in the same vm/type?

> apiVersion: node.k8s.io/v1

Author: @mikebrow "Do all of the containers need to be in the same vm/type?" not sure I understand this. All the containers inside of a pod have to be using the same runtime class. If a pod is started as hyperV isolated all the containers inside the pod would be hyperV isolated as well.

I think I would prefer having runtime class to pass this information for reasons mentioned by James.

For example, a user might want to pull an image like python (a manifest list) on a WS2022 host with an intent of running it in on a WS2019 hyperV isolated UVM. But unfortunately, the current windows platform matcher behavior only forces the WS2022 version of the python image to be pulled (due to the exact version match between host and guest). If a manifest list does not have a version that matches the host OS version, then the image pull fails.
Extending image pulls to specify an optional runtime class would greatly help to extend windows platform matcher behavior to pull different manifests from the image index depending on what runtime class is used.
For example, we could have one runtime class pull one version of python image while another runtime class could be used to pull a completely different version of the same image.
Additionally, having support to pull images per runtime class might also help projects like supporting different snapshotters with different runtimes as well.

### Goals

This KEP describes the detailed design and API changes needed in kubelet and CRI to support image pull with optional runtime class option.

> Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Reviewer 7: ** if we add platform to containerd runtime class....and change the platform matcher in containerd.. then the user/admin can still pick on a "node" basis what the behavior will be for said default/existing runtime classes.

Author: Hmm not sure I understand the concern here :) Are you suggesting this be added as smth the KEP could achieve?

Reviewer 7: not really a concern.. this is a more a mitigation/statement regarding what could be done "if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull" in regards to the goal stated here "to keep the functionality same as it is today."

# KEP

# KEP-4216: Image pull per runtime class

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [CRI/kubelet changes:](#crikubelet-changes)
    - [ImageSpec](#imagespec)
  - [Kubelet changes](#kubelet-changes)
  - [Tooling changes](#tooling-changes)
    - [CRICTL changes](#crictl-changes)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
      - [e2e tests](#e2e-tests)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
    - [Alpha](#alpha)
    - [Beta](#beta)
    - [GA](#ga)
    - [Deprecation](#deprecation)
    - [Alpha](#alpha-1)
    - [Beta](#beta-1)
    - [GA](#ga-1)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
  - [Feature Enablement and Rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
  - [Monitoring Requirements](#monitoring-requirements)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Scalability](#scalability)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

> Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

Reviewer 3: Please add check marks where appropriate

GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Implement the above mentioned CRI changes
- Implement necessary kubelet changes to pass runtimeClass on CRI calls behind a feature flag
- Add related e2e and unit tests to ensure functionality and make sure there is no regression in
existing behavior when runtime class is not specified in the CRI calls to container runtime.

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Work on feedback and add additional tests as needed
- Follow up on container runtime changes for containerd and CRI-O

#### GA

> - No conrete plan for GA yet

Reviewer 3: `concrete`.

I suggest saying we will make a decision on when to GA based on the beta feedback.

  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Today, container images in containerd are identified by the image name/id. Images can either be a manifest or manifest list/index. Containerd's platform matcher code kicks in for index images and is responsible for pulling an appropriate manifest from the index of that image.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Today, container images in containerd are identified by the image name/id. Images can either be a manifest or manifest list/index. When an image is specified platform matching logic in containerd is used to pull the appropriate manifest from the index of that image
```

         "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
         "size": 2007,
         "digest": "sha256:f265d2f398ffce7252d6162ead0bc802afad2de309cf662ec16645d1e0e85564",
         "platform": {
            "architecture": "s390x",
            "os": "linux"
         }
      },
      {
         "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
         "size": 2831,
         "digest": "sha256:53c5f0dd905eef3899284d845431ccaa1045f97fc205edd87dfc2151c4331980",
         "platform": {
            "architecture": "amd64",
            "os": "windows",
           <mark> "os.version": "10.0.20348.1970"  </mark>
         }
      },
      {
         "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.distribution.manifest.v2+json",
         "size": 2831,
         "digest": "sha256:5981df14a07aaa7fe0c7d80a4c61f33f4ad4d8d29a346fd1b2cacf090b3de8c2",
         "platform": {
            "architecture": "amd64",
            "os": "windows",
           <mark> "os.version": "10.0.17763.4851" </mark>
         }
      }
   ]
}
</pre>

In containerd, each platform has its own platform matcher which is used to
decide which manifest to pull from an image index/manifest list.

> Containerd's client structure has pointer to the default platform matcher based on what OS/platform the node is on (Linux,windows, Darwin etc).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Containerd's client structure has pointer to the default platform matcher based on what OS/platform the node is on (Linux, Windows, Darwin, etc).
```

The platform matcher on linux attempts to check for host and guest OS match and optionally for a variant match as well.
However, the platform matcher on windows checks for exact OS version match between the host and guest (OSVersion field in the oci ImageSpec is primarily used only for windows manifests) and if a manifest with such an exact match is found, it is pulled. Otherwise an error is thrown. <br> This is the desired behavior for process isolated windows containers as its shares the kernel with the host OS. However, it is not ideal for hyperV isolated windows containers. This is because OS version of the host and the UVM image need not be the same.

> For example, we could have a UVM  running Windows Server 2019 image on a Windows Server 2022 host and this should be allowed. For the full matrix of accepted behavior, check the link here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility?tabs=windows-server-2022%2Cwindows-10#windows-server-host-os-compatibility 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, Windows Server 2019 container images can run inside a Utility VM (UVM) on a Windows Server 2022 host and because of this the image pulls should be allowed. For the full matrix of accepted behavior, check the link here: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/deploy-containers/version-compatibility?tabs=windows-server-2022%2Cwindows-10#windows-server-host-os-compatibility 
```

` Note: ` UVM is short for utility VM. It is a light weight VM that boots a special version of Windows that is pupose built to do just one thing- run containers. UVMs provide strong isolation boundaries and do not share kernel with the host OS. They are transparent to the user and do not require any management from the user.

> This problem can be fixed if containerd, CRI and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/ID, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/ID. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and pull the appropriate manifest from the image index.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This problem can be fixed if containerd, CRI, and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/ID, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/ID. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and pull the appropriate manifest from the image index.
```

> This problem can be fixed if containerd, CRI and kubelet refer to images as a tuple of (imageName/ID, runtimeClass) instead of the imageName/ID. With this, we can specify the runtimeClass a particular image is being run for and pull the appropriate manifest from the image index.

Reviewer 4: Here you mention that we can solve the problem if we include runtimeClass when specifying the image.
Can you breifly eplain how this will get solved?
Is the plan to have the platform matcher check the runtimeClass config for the target and match the OS version to the one specified instead of the host's OS version?

Author: Yes. We would extend containerd behavior to have a platform matcher per runtime class - If guestPlatform has been specified for a hyperV runtime class in containerd.toml, then the platform matcher for this runtime classs should be based on the guestPlatform.OSVersion rather than the host's OS version.

I had this detail in the KEP before but got rid of it as it was talking about containerd specific implementation and got feedback that we should have only k8s changes in this KEP. Will add a sentence or two to this paragraph as an example of how containerd behavior can be changed.

Author: Added the following to this paragraph:
"An example implementation in the containerd container runtime on how the pull implementation can be extended to support this is as follows:
On containerd, the windows platform matcher is responsible for pulling an appropriate manifest from an image index on windows platforms. Today, this platform matcher on windows always looks for a manifest with the OSVersion that matches the host and pulls it. This can be changed to pick a manifest with OSVersion that matches the one set for a particular runtime class in containerd.toml instead of the host OSVersion. "

This document details the changes needed to support pulling images per runtime class.
Adding this support would enable us to have different versions of the same image on a given node and could be really beneficial in virtualization based runtimes. It will also be very helpful to support future projects to support snapshotter per runtimeclass. 

> For windows in particular, different versions of a multiarch image could be pulled based on hyperV and process isolation and we could remove the necessity for exact host and guest OS version matches for hyperV isolation.

Reviewer 4: Maybe add a coment saying this could be useful for any VM based container solution?

This KEP attempts to goes over the details of the most significant changes needed in containerd, CRI, kubelet and tools like ctr and crictl to support this feature.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 4: A lot of the details here seem redundant with above details. Maybe you can say see above for the example?

Currently, the windows platform matcher looks for an exact OS version match between the host and guest while pulling images. This behavior is not accurate for hyperV isolation as the UVM/sandbox OS version could be different from the host OS version.  

For example, a user might want to pull an image like python (a manifest list) on a WS2022 host with an intent of running it in on a WS2019 hyperV isolated UVM. But unfortunately, the current windows platform matcher behavior only forces the WS2022 version of the python image to be pulled (due to the exact version match between host and guest). If a manifest list does not have a version that matches the host OS version, then the image pull fails.
Extending image pulls to specify an optional runtime class would greatly help to extend windows platform matcher behavior depending on whether hyperV or process isolation is being used.
Additionally, having support to pull images per runtime class might also help projects like supporting different snapshotters with different runtimes as well.

### Goals

> This KEP describes the detailed design and major API changes needed in kubelet, CRI and containerd to support image pull with optional runtime class option.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This KEP describes the detailed design and API changes needed in kubelet, CRI, and containerd to support image pull with optional runtime class option.
```

Goal is to keep the functionality same as it is today if user does not use the runtime class option with image pull.

Note: This document does not intend to address snapshotter per runtime class. It is different from image pull per runtime class and would need a separate KEP to address

### Non-Goals

This KEP only addresses the changes needed on containerd runtime. It does not cover other runtimes like CRI-O and would need contributions from maintainers/contributors from other runtimes to support this on their runtimes.

## Proposal

## Design Details

### CRI/kubelet changes:

With this feature, multiple versions of the same image can exist on a single node.

> For exmaple, python image can exist on the node for WS2022 (20348 build number) and WS2019(17703 build number) depending on the guestOSVersion mentioned in containerd's toml file for a runtime.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For exmaple, python image can exist on the node for WS2022 (OSVersion = 20348) and WS2019(OsVersion = 17703) depending on the guestOSVersion mentioned in containerd's toml file for a runtime.
```

> Therefore, it is important for kubelet, containerd and other components to identify this.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is important for kubelet, containerd, and other components to identify all of the OSversion's supported by the host.
```
Feel free to reword but maybe be more specific then 'this'

    string image = 1;
    // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary metadata.
    // ImageSpec Annotations can be used to help the runtime target specific
    // images in multi-arch images.
    map<string, string> annotations = 2;
    // The container image reference specified by the user (e.g. image[:tag] or digest).
    // Only set if available within the RPC context.
    string user_specified_image = 18;
    // Named runtime configuration to use for pulling the image.
    // If the runtime handler is unknown, this request should be rejected.  An
    // empty string should select the default handler, equivalent to the
    // behavior before this feature was added.
    <mark>string runtime_handler = 19;</mark>
}
</pre>

The "RuntimeClassName" of [podspec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3084) can be used to specify the runtime class name and then can be populated in ImageSpec struct during **EnsureImageExists()** call in kubelet.

ImageSpec is referenced in the following APIs and can set the RuntimeHandler
field if needed:

1. PullImageRequest
2. RemoveImageRequest
3. ImageStatusRequest

### Kubelet changes

> Kubelet needs to change how it talks about images from just the image name to (imageName, runtimeclass). As discussed in earlier sections, extending the Image struct in CRI to add a field for runtimeclass will make it easier to extend Kubelet API to include this information. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Kubelet needs to change how it talks about images from just the image name to (imageName, runtimeclass). As discussed in earlier sections, extending the `Image` struct in CRI to add a field for runtimeClass will make it easier to extend Kubelet API to include this information. 
```

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, [feature gate] graduations, or as
something else. The KEP should keep this high-level with a focus on what
signals will be looked at to determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

> #### Alpha

Reviewer 4: Let's fill out the Alpha graduation criteria.

Something like
- Above CRI changes are implemented
- Kubelet changes to pass runtimeClass on CRI calls implmented behind a feature flag

  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Today, container images in containerd are identified by the image name/id. Images can either be a manifest or manifest list/index. When an image is specified, platform matching logic in containerd is used to pull the appropriate manifest from the index of that image.

Author: I will change this intro to just refer to runtime. But in a later section I have used containerd as an example where I feel its necessary to understand the end to end motivation and what I am proposing to make sense

> Today, container images in containerd are identified by the image name/id. Images can either be a manifest or manifest list/index. When an image is specified, platform matching logic in containerd is used to pull the appropriate manifest from the index of that image.

Reviewer 3: It is fine to call out containerd as an example. But we don't need to fully go through the containerd specific implementation details as part of this KEP.

> Today, container images in containerd are identified by the image name/id. Images can either be a manifest or manifest list/index. When an image is specified, platform matching logic in containerd is used to pull the appropriate manifest from the index of that image.

Author: Fixed this and updated the PR with the changes. Containerd is only mentioned as an example in 2-3 places but in general I have changed to "container runtime"

    string image = 1;
    // Unstructured key-value map holding arbitrary metadata.
    // ImageSpec Annotations can be used to help the runtime target specific
    // images in multi-arch images.
    map<string, string> annotations = 2;
    // The container image reference specified by the user (e.g. image[:tag] or digest).
    // Only set if available within the RPC context.
    string user_specified_image = 18;
    // Named runtime configuration to use for pulling the image.
    // If the runtime handler is unknown, this request should be rejected.  An
    // empty string should select the default handler, equivalent to the
    // behavior before this feature was added.
    <mark>string runtime_handler = 19;</mark>
}
</pre>

The "RuntimeClassName" of [podspec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L3084) can be used to specify the runtime class name and then can be populated in ImageSpec struct during **EnsureImageExists()** call in kubelet.

ImageSpec is referenced in the following APIs and can set the RuntimeHandler
field if needed:

1. PullImageRequest
2. RemoveImageRequest
3. ImageStatusRequest

> ### Kubelet changes

Reviewer 4: Can you specify the name of the feature-gate that will be used to control having the kubelet extra information described below here and also update it in the kep.yaml file?

### Tooling changes

#### CRICTL changes

List of crictl image commands that need to be extended:

1. crictl pull image --runtime runtimeClassName imageName

2. crictl images will have new column to specify the runtime class name of the image as we could now have multiple versions of the same image based on what runtime class was used to pull the image. If no runtime class was used it will specify the default runtime class name for the platform

3. crictl rmi should have new option to specify runtime class name so that the appropriate image can be removed. (With this feature in place, multiple versions of the same image can exist on the node based on what runtime class was used to pull the image)
4. crictl image info should show runtime class

### Test Plan

We should have functional and regression tests for all platforms (windows, linux, darwin) to ensure functionality and stability.

- Regression testing to ensure exisiting functionality is not regressed when no runtime class is specified while pulling the image
- Functional/integration tests for CRI, and kubelet.

> [ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to

Reviewer 4: check this box please
